<h1>Part 2: Rings</h1>

$$
\newcommand{\bm}[1]{\boldsymbol{#1}}
\newcommand{\e}{\textup{e}}
\renewcommand{\i}{\textup{i}}
\newcommand{\Beta}{\textup{B}}
\newcommand{\ve}{\varepsilon}
\newcommand{\omicron}{\mathit{o}}

\newcommand{\D}{\mathbb{D}}
\newcommand{\E}{\mathbb{E}}
\newcommand{\F}{\mathbb{F}}
\newcommand{\K}{\mathbb{K}}
\newcommand{\L}{\mathbb{L}}
\newcommand{\J}{\mathbb{J}}

\newcommand{\trans}{^\mathrm{T}}
\newcommand{\inv}{^{-1}}
\newcommand{\adj}[1]{^{\pqty{#1^*}}}
\renewcommand{\r}{\textup{r}}
\newcommand{\aqty}[1]{\expval{#1}}
%\newcommand{\aqty}[1]{\left\langle#1\right\rangle}
\newcommand{\qed}{\quad\square}

\newcommand{\oneton}{1,2,\cdots,n}
\newcommand{\onetos}{1,2,\cdots,s}
\newcommand{\onetok}{1,2,\cdots,k}
\newcommand{\oneto}[1]{1,2,\cdots,#1}
\newcommand{\soneto}[2]{#1_1, #1_2, \cdots, #1_{#2}}

\DeclareMathOperator{\st}{s.t.\,}
\DeclareMathOperator{\diag}{diag}
\DeclareMathOperator{\Ker}{Ker}
\DeclareMathOperator{\Aut}{Aut}
\DeclareMathOperator{\Inn}{Inn}
\DeclareMathOperator{\stab}{stab}
\DeclareMathOperator{\GL}{GL}
\DeclareMathOperator{\SL}{SL}
\DeclareMathOperator{\stab}{stab}
\DeclareMathOperator{\orb}{orb}
\DeclareMathOperator{\lcm}{lcm}
\DeclareMathOperator{\char}{char}
\DeclareMathOperator{\Ann}{Ann}
\DeclareMathOperator{\GF}{GF}

\newcommand{\LRA}{\Leftrightarrow}
\newcommand{\RLA}{\Leftrightarrow}
\newcommand{\LA}{\Leftarrow}
\newcommand{\RA}{\Rightarrow}

\newcommand{\lra}{\leftrightarrow}
\newcommand{\rla}{\leftrightarrow}
\newcommand{\la}{\leftarrow}
\newcommand{\ra}{\rightarrow}

\newcommand{\QRLA}{\quad\RLA\quad}
\newcommand{\QRA}{\quad\RA\quad}
\newcommand{\LLRA}{\Longleftrightarrow}

\newcommand{\QNRA}{\quad\nRightarrow\quad}
\newcommand{\qnra}{\quad\nrightarrow\quad}

\newcommand{\capop}{\displaystyle\mathop\cap\limits}
\newcommand{\cupop}{\displaystyle\mathop\cup\limits}
\newcommand{\oplusop}{\mathop\oplus\limits}
\newcommand{\otimesop}{\mathop\otimes\limits}
\newcommand{\bigoplusop}{\mathop\bigoplus\limits}
\newcommand{\bigotimesop}{\mathop\bigotimes\limits}

\def\arsh{\ensuremath{\operatorname{arsh}}}
\def\arch{\ensuremath{\operatorname{arch}}}
\def\arth{\ensuremath{\operatorname{arth}}}
$$

[TOC]

# 12	Introduction to Rings

## 12.1	Motivation and Definition

**Definition**	Ring

> A ring $R$ os a set with two binary operations, addtion and multiplication, such that for all $a, b, c$ in $R$:
>
> 1. $ a+b=b+a $.
> 2. $ (a+b)+c=a+(b+c) $.
> 3. There is an additive identity $0$. This is , there is an element $0$ in $R$ such that $ a+0=a $ for all $a$ in $R$.
> 4. There is an element $-a$ in $R$ such that $ a+(-a)=0 $.
> 5. $ a(bc) = (ab)c $.
> 6. $ a(b+c) = ab+ac $ and $ (b+c)a = ba+ca $.

- A ring is an Abelian group under addition, also having an *associative* multiplication that is left and right *distributive* over addition.

- A ring need not have an identity under multiplication (**unity**). $a$ is a **unit** if $a\inv$ exists.

## 12.2	Examples of Rings

- $ \Z,\, \Z_n,\, n\Z,\, \Z[x],\, M_n(\Z) $

- $ (f+g)(a) = f(a) + g(a),\, (fg) = f(a)g(a) $.
- Direct sum: $ R_1 \oplus R_2 \oplus \cdots \oplus R_n $.

## 12.3	Properties of Rings

**Theorem 12.1**	Rules of Multiplication

> Let $a$, $b$ and $c$ belong to a ring $R$. Then
>
> 1. $ a0 = 0a = 0 $.
>
> 2. $ a(-b) = (-a)b = -(ab) $.
>
> 3. $ (-a)(-b) = ab $.
>
> 4. $ a(b-c) = ab-ac,\, (b-c)a = ba-ca $.
>
>    Futhermore, if $R$ has a unity element $1$, then
>
> 5. $ (-1)a = -a $.
>
> 6. $ (-1)(-1) = 1 $.

**Theorem 12.2**	Uniqueness of the Unity and Inverses

> If a ring has a unity, it is unique. If a ring element has a multiplicative inverse, it is unique.

- The ring need not have mutliplicative cancellation: $ a \ne 0,\, ab=ac \QNRA b=c $.
- The ring need not have a mutliplicative identity: $ a^2 = a \QNRA a = 0 $ or $1$.

## 12.4	Subrings

**Definition**	Subring

> A subset $S$ of a ring $R$ is a subring of $R$ if $S$ is itself a ring with the operations of $R$.

- The subring $2\Z_{10}$ of $\Z_{10}$, has a unity $6$ and every nonzero element is a unit of $2\Z_{10}$, but none of these elements is a unit in $\Z_{10}$.
- The intersection of any collection of subring of a ring $R$ is a subring of $R$.

**Theorem 12.3**	Subring Test

> A nonempty subset $S$ of a ring $R$ is a subring if $S$ is closed under subtraction and mutliplication. In symbols, $ \forall a, b \in S $,
> $$
> a-b,\, ab \in S.
> $$

**Subring lattice diagram**
$$
\xymatrix{
	&&&& \C \ar@{-}[ddl] \ar@{-}[d] &&&
	\\
	&&&& \R \ar@{-}[dd] \ar@{-}[dr] &&&
	\\
	&&& \Z[\i] \ar@{-}[ddr] &&
	\Q[\sqrt{2}] \ar@{-}[dl] &&
	\\
	&&&& \Q \ar@{-}[d] &&&
	\\
	&&&& \Z \ar@{-}[dlll] \ar@{-}[dl]
	\ar@{-}[dr] \ar@{-}[drrr] &&&
	\\
	& 5\Z \ar@{-}[dl] &&
	2\Z \ar@{-}[dlll] \ar@{-}[dl] \ar@{-}[dr] &&
	3\Z \ar@{-}[dl] \ar@{-}[dr] &&
	7\Z
	\\
	10\Z &&
	4\Z \ar@{-}[dl] \ar@{-}[dr] &&
	6\Z \ar@{-}[dl] \ar@{-}[dr] &&
	9\Z \ar@{-}[dl] &
	\\
	& 8\Z &&
	12\Z &&
	18\Z &&
}
$$

## 12.5	Exercises

1. A ring is ==commutative== if it has the property that $ab=ca\,(a\ne0)$ implies $b=c$. (Both outer cancellation and inner cancellation imply commutativity.)
2. Let $a$, $b$, and $c$ be elements of a ==commutative== ring, and suppose that $a$ is a unit. Prove that $ b \mid c \RLA ab \mid c $.
3. Let $ a, b \in R,\, m, n \in \Z $, then $ m\cdot(ab) = (m\cdot a)b = a(m\cdot b) $, and $ (m\cdot a) (n \cdot b) = (mn) \cdot (ab) $.
4. A ring that is ==cyclic== under addition is commutative.
5. The ==center== of a ring is a subring.
6. Let $U(R)$ denote the set of units of a commutative ring $R$, then $U(R)$ is a group under the multiplication of $R$.
7. Suppose that $a$ and $b$ belong to a commutative ring $R$ with unity. If $a$ is a unit of $R$ and $b^2=0$, show that $a+b$ is a unit of $R$. ($ (a+b)(a\inv - a^{-2}b) = 1 $)
8. **Nilpotent**: $x^n=0 \,(n>1)$.
   1. Let $a$ be a nilpotent, prove that $1-a$ has a multiplicative inverse.
   2. The ==nilpotent elements== of a commutative ring form a subring.
   3. $\Z_n$ has a nonzero nilpotent element if and only if $n$ is divisible by the square of some prime. (Hint: $ n = p^2m,\, (pm)^2=0 $)

9. **Idempotent**: $ x^n = x\, (n>1) $.
   1. $ x = x^{1+m(n-1)} $.
   2. $ \exist m \in \N^+,\, x^m = 0 \QRA x=0 $.
   3. $ ab = 0 \QRA ba = 0 $.  (It's not true in $ M_n(\R) $.)
   4. $ 2x = 2^n x^n = 2^n x \QRA (2^n-2)x = 0 $.
   5. If $a$ and $b$ are idempotent, then $ a^{n_1} + k_1b^{n_2} + k_2a^{n_3}b^{n_4} $ is idempotent.

10. **Boolean ring**: $ x^2 = x $ for all $x$ in $R$.
    1. $ -x = (-x)^2 = x \QRA 2x=0 $.
    2. Boolean ring is ==commutative==: $ a+b = (a+b)^2 = a + ab + ba + b \QRA ab = -ba = ba $.

11. There is no integer $n>1$ such that $a^n=a$ for all $a$ in $\Z_m$ when $m$ is divisible by the square of some prime.
12. Let $R$ be a commutative ring with more than one element. Prove that if for every nonzero element $a$ of $R$ we have $aR=R$, then $R$ has a ==unity== and every nonzero element has an ==inverse==.

## 12.6	Bibliography of I.N.Herstein



# 13	Integral Domains

## 13.1	Definition and Examples

**Definition**	Zero-Divisors

> A zero-divisor is a nonzero element $a$ of a ==commutative== ring $R$ such that there is a nonzero element $b\in R$ with $ ab=0 $.

**Definition	**Integral Domain

> An integral domain is a ==commutative== ring with ==unity== and ==no zero-divisors==.

- Integral domain: $ \Z,\, \Z[x],\, \Z[\sqrt{2}],\, \Z_p $.
- Not an integral domain: $ M_2(\Z),\, \Z \oplus \Z $.

**Theorem 13.1	**Cancellation

> Let $a$, $b$, and $c$ belong to an integral domain. If $a\ne0$ and $ ab = ac $, then $ b=c $.

## 13.2	Fields

**Definition	**Field

> A field is a ==commutative== ring with ==unity== in which every nonzero element is a ==unit==.

- Every field is an integral domain.
- A field is an algebraic system that is closed under addition, subtraction, multiplication and division (except by 0).

**Theorem 13.2** :star:

> A finite integral domain is a field.

**Corollary	**$\Z_p$ Is a Field

> For every prime $p$, $\Z_p$, the ring of integers modulo $p$ is a field.

- Field: $ \Z_3[i],\, \Q[\sqrt{2}] $.
- Not a field: $ \Z_5[\i] $.

**Theorem**	Subfield Test

> Let $F$ be a field and let $K$ be a subset of $F$ with at least two elements. Then $K$ is a subfield of $F$ if and only if $ \forall a, b\,(b\ne 0) \in K $
> $$
> a-b,\, ab\inv \in K.
> $$

## 13.3	Characteristic of a Ring

**Definition	**Characteristic of a Ring

> The **characteristic** of a ring $R$ is the least positive integer $n$ such that $ nx=0 $ for all $x$ in $R$. If no such integer exists, we say that $R$ has characteristic $0$. The characteristic of $R$ is denoted by $ \char{R} $.

<span style="color:#777777">Review that the exponent of a group $G$ is the positive integer $n$ such that $x^n=e$ for all $x$ in $G$.</span>

- $ \char{\Z} = 0,\, \char{\Z_n} = n,\, \char{\Z_2[x]} = 2 $.
- $ \char{R} $ divides $ \vqty{R} $, and a finite ring must have a nonzero characteristic.

**Theorem 13.3	**Characteristic of a Ring with Unity

> Let $R$ be a ring with unity $1$. If $1$ has infinite order under addition, then the characteristic of $R$ is $0$. If $1$ has order $n$ under addition, then the characteristic of $R$ is $n$.

**Theorem 13.4	**Characteristic of an Integral Domain

> The characteristic of an integral domain is $0$ or prime.

| Ring           | Unity    | Commutative | Integral Domain | Field | Characteristic |
| -------------- | -------- | ----------- | --------------- | ----- | -------------- |
| $\Z$           | $1$      | Yes         | Yes             | No    | $0$            |
| $\Z_n$         | $1$      | Yes         | No              | No    | $n$            |
| $\Z_p$         | $1$      | Yes         | Yes             | Yes   | $p$            |
| $\Z[x]$        | $f(x)=1$ | Yes         | Yes             | No    | 0              |
| $n\Z$          | None     | Yes         | No              | No    | 0              |
| $M_n(\Z)$      | $E_n$    | No          | No              | No    | 0              |
| $M_2(2\Z)$     | None     | No          | No              | No    | 0              |
| $\Z[\i]$       | $1$      | Yes         | Yes             | No    | 0              |
| $\Z_3[\i]$     | $1$      | Yes         | Yes             | Yes   | 3              |
| $\Z_5[\i]$     | $1$      | Yes         | No              | No    | 5              |
| $\Z[\sqrt{2}]$ | $1$      | Yes         | Yes             | No    | 0              |
| $\Q[\sqrt{2}]$ | $1$      | Yes         | Yes             | Yes   | 0              |
| $\Z\oplus\Z$   | $(1, 1)$ | Yes         | No              | No    | 0              |

## 13.4	Exercises

1. For a nonzero element $a$ in $\Z_n$, if $ \gcd(a, n) = 1 $, then $a$ is a unit, else $a$ is a zero-divisor.

2. Every nonzero element of a ==finite commutative== ring with unity is either a zero-divisor or a unit.

   Hint: Let $s \in R$, $ S = \Bqty{ sr \mid r \in R } $.

3. If $d$ is an integer, then $ \Z[\sqrt{d}] = \Bqty{ a+b\sqrt{d} \mid a, b \in \Z } $ is an ==integral domain==, and $ \Q[\sqrt{d}] $ is a ==field==. $ \Z_p[\sqrt{k}] = \Bqty{ a+b\sqrt{k} \mid a, b \in \Z_p } $ is a field if and only if $ a^2 \ne b^2k $.

4. Let $R$ be a ring with unity. If the product of any pair of nonzero elements of $R$ is ==nonzero==, then $ ab=1 \RLA ba=1 $.

5. $ P = \Bqty{ n \cdot 1 \mid n \in \Z } $ is a **subdomain** of any integral domain $D$ with unity $1$, and $ \vqty{P} = \char{D} $ (a prime or $\infty$).

6. If a field $F$ has order $p^n$, then $ \char{F} = p $.

7. Show that a finite commutative ring with no zero-divisors and at least two elements has a unity.

8. Suppose $a$ and $b$ belong to a commutative ring and $ab$ is a zero-divisor, then $a$ or $b$ is a zero-divisor.

9. If $R$ is a commutative ring without zero-divisors, then

   1. All the nonzero elements of $R$ have ==the same additive order==.
   2. The characteristic of $R$ is $0$ or prime.

10. Any finite field has order $p^n$.

11. Let $\soneto{x}{n}$ belong to a commutative ring $R$ with prime characteristic $p$, then

    1. $ (x_1+x_2+\cdots+x_n)^{p^m} = x_1^{p^m} + x_2^{p^m} + \cdots + x_1^{p^m} $.
    2. If $a\in R$ is a nilpotent of degree $k$, then $ (1+a)^{p^k} = 1 $.
    3. $ K = \Bqty{ x \in R \mid x^p = x } $ is a subring of $R$.

12. Let $\F$ be a finite field with $n$ elements, prove that $x^{n-1}=1$ for all nonzero $x$ in $\F$.

13. Let $S$ be a subring of a ring $R$ and suppose that $u_S$ is a unity in $S$ and $u_R$ is a unity in $R$ and $u_S \ne u_R$, then $ u_Su_R = u_Su_S \RA u_S(u_R-u_S) = 0 $.



# 14	Ideals and Factor Rings

## 14.1	Ideals

**Definition**	Ideal

> A subring $A$ of a ring $R$ is called a (two-sided) **ideal** of $R$ if $ \forall r \in R,\, \forall a \in A $, $ ar, ra \in A $.

- In other words, $ \forall r \in R,\, rA \subseteq A,\, Ar \subseteq A $.

- If $A$ is an ideal of a ring $R$ and $1$ belongs to $A$, then $A=R$ since $ r \cdot 1 = r \in A $.

  - If an ideal $I$ of a ring $R$ contains a unit, then $I=R$.
  - The only ideals of a field $\F$ are $\Bqty{0}$ and $\F$ itself and viceversa.

- The ==interesction== of any set of ideals of a ring is an ideal.

- The ==sum== of ideals $ A + B = \Bqty{ a+b \mid a \in A,\, b \in B } $ is an ideal.

  - $ \aqty{m, n} = \aqty{m} + \aqty{n} = \aqty{\gcd(m, n)} $.

- The ==product== of ideals $ AB = \Bqty{ a_1b_1 + a_2b_2 + \cdots a_nb_n \mid a_i \in A,\, b_i \in B,\, n \in \N^+ } $ is an ideal.

  - $ \aqty{m}\aqty{n} = \aqty{mn} $.
  - $ AB \subseteq A \cap B $.

- If $A$ and $B$ are ideals of a commutative ring $R$ with unity and $A+B=R$, then $A \cap B = AB$.

  Proof: $ a+b=1,\, a_1 = b_1 = a_1a + a_1b = ab_1 + a_1 b \in AB \RA A \cap B \subseteq AB $.

**Theorem 14.1**	Ideal Test

> A nonempty subset $A$ of a ring $R$ is an ideal of $R$ if
>
> 1. $ \forall a, b \in A,\, a-b \in A $.
> 2. $ \forall a \in A, r \in R,\, ar, ra \in A $.

- Let $a$ be an element of a ==commutative== ring $R$, then the set $ \aqty{a} = \Bqty{ ra \mid r \in R } $ is an ideal of $R$ called the **principal ideal** generated by $a$.
  - All polynomials with constant term $0$, $ A = \aqty{x} $, is the subring of $ \R[x] $.
  - If $a$ is an idempotent, then $a$ is the identity in the ideal $\aqty{a}$.
  - If $a, b$ belong to an integral domain, then $ \aqty{a} = \aqty{b} $ if and only if $a=bu$ where $u$ is a unit.
  - The characteristic of $\aqty{a}$ is the additive order of $a$.
- Let $ \soneto{a}{n} $ be elements of a ==commutatvive== ring $R$, then $ I = \aqty{\soneto{a}{n}} = \Bqty{ r_1a_1 + r_2a_2 + \cdots + r_na_n \mid r_i \in R } $ is called the ideal generated by $ \soneto{a}{n} $.
  - All polynomials with even constant terms, $ I = \aqty{x, 2} $, is the subring of $ \Z[x] $.
- Let $R$ be the ring of all real-valued functions of a real variable. The subset $S$ of all differentiable functions is a subring of $R$ but not an ideal of $R$.

## 14.2	Factor Rings

**Theorem 14.2**	Existence of Factor Rings

> Let $R$ be a ring and let $A$ be a subring of $R$. The set of cosets $ \Bqty{ r + A \mid r \in R } $ is a ring under the operations $ (s+A) + (t+A) = s+t+A $ and $ (s+A)(t+A) = st + A $ if and only if $A$ is an ideal of $R$.

- $R/I$ is a ==commutative== ring with unity if and only if $ rs - sr \in I $ for all $r$ and $s$ in $R$.
- $R/I$ is a commutative ring with unity if $R$ is commutative.

e.g.

- $ R = \Z_3[x] / \aqty{x^2+1} $ is a cyclic group as well as a field of order $9$.
- $ R = \Z_5[x] / \aqty{x^2+1} $ is not a field. $ \vqty{R} = 25,\, \vqty{x+1} = 4,\, (x+2)(x+3) = 0 $.
- $ \vqty{ \Z[i] / \aqty{a+bi} } = (a^2+b^2)b $.

## 14.3	Prime Ideals and Maximal Ideals

**Definition**	Prime Ideal, Maximal Ideal

> A **prime ideal** $A$ of a commutative ring $R$ is a proper ideal of $R$ such that $ a, b \in R $ and $ ab \in A $ imply $ a \in A $ or $ b \in A $.
>
> A **maximal ideal** of a commutative ring $R$ is a proper ideal $A$ of $R$ such that, whenever $B$ is an ideal of $R$ and $ A \subseteq B \subseteq R $, then $ B = A $ or $ B = R $.

- $ n\Z $ is prime if and only if $n$ is prime. ($\Bqty{0}$ is also a prime ideal of $\Z$)
- $\aqty{s}$ is a maximal ideal in $\Z_{st}$ if and only if $s$ is prime.
- $ \aqty{n} $ is a maximal ideal in $\Z$ if and only if $n$ is prime.
- The lattice of ideals of $\Z_{36}$ shows that both $ \aqty{2} $ and $ \aqty{3} $ are maximal ideals.

$$
\xymatrix{
	&& \Z_{36} \ar@{-}[dl] \ar@{-}[dr] &&
	\\
	& \aqty{2} \ar@{-}[dl] \ar@{-}[dr] &
	& \aqty{3} \ar@{-}[dl] \ar@{-}[dr] &
	\\
	\aqty{4} \ar@{-}[dr] &&
	\aqty{6} \ar@{-}[dl] \ar@{-}[dr] &&
	\aqty{9} \ar@{-}[dl]
	\\
	& \aqty{12} \ar@{-}[dr] &
	& \aqty{18} \ar@{-}[dl] &
	\\
	&& \aqty{0} &&
}
$$

- From above we see that the intersection of prime ideals need not be a prime ideal.
- The ideal $\aqty{x^2+1}$ is maximal in $\R[x]$. To prove this, assume $A$ is an ideal of $\R[x]$ that properly contains $\aqty{x^2+1}$ and prove that $A=\R[x]$.
- The ideal $\aqty{x^2+1}$ is not prime in $\Z_2[x]$, since it contains $(x+1)^2 = x^2+1$ but not $ x+1 $.
- If $R$ is a ==finite commutative== ring with unity, then every prime ideal of $R$ is maximal.

**Theorem 14.3**	$R/A$ Is an Integral Domain If and Only If $A$ is Prime

> Let $R$ be a commutative ring with unity and let $A$ be an ideal of $R$. Then $R/A$ is an integral domain if and only if $A$ is prime.

**Proof**	$ (a+A)(b+A) = ab+A = A \QRLA a+A = A \text{ or } b+A = A $.

**Theorem 14.4**	$R/A$ is a Field If and Only If $A$ Is Maximal

> Let $R$ be a commutative ring with unity and let $A$ be an ideal of $R$. Then $R/A$ is a field if and only $A$ is maximal.

- Maximal ideals are prime. :star:
- From Examples to Theorem 14.2, we know that $\aqty{x^2+1}$ is maximal in $\Z_3[x]$ but not prime in $\Z_5[x]$.
- The ideal $\aqty{x}$ in $\Z[x]$ is prime but not maximal.
- $ \R[x]/\aqty{x^2+1} $ is a field.

## 14.4	Exercises

1. $\aqty{2}$ is a maximal ideal of $\Z$ but $\aqty{2}[x]$ is not a maximal ideal of $\Z[x]$. $ \aqty{2, x} $ is maximal.

2. In a commutative ring, the set of zero-divisors is an ideal.

3. Every nontrivial prime ideal of a finite commutative ring with unity is a maximal ideal. :star:

   Proof: If $P$ is prime in $R$, then $ R/P $ is a finite integral domain. Since a finite integral domain is a field, $P$ is also maximal.

4. Every nontrivial prime ideal in a PID is a maximal ideal. :star:

5. Every factor ring of a PID is a PID. :star:

   Hint: Every factor ring of $R/I$ has the form $A/I$, where $A$ is a subring of $R$.

6. Let $A$ be a subset of a commutative ring $R$, then

   1. The **annihilator** $ \Ann{A} = \Bqty{ r \in R \mid ra = 0 \text{ for all $a$ in $A$} } $ is an ideal.
   2. The **nil radical** of $A$: $ N(A) = \Bqty{ r \in R \mid r^n \in A, n \in \N^+ } $ is an ideal.
   3. The nil radical of $R$: $ N(\aqty{0}) $ is an ideal.
   4. $R/N(\aqty{0})$ has no nonzero nilpotent elements.
   5. $ N(N(A)) = N(A) $.



Confusion: 27

## 14.5	Bibliography of Richard Dedekind

## 14.6	Bibliography of Emmy Noether



# 15	Ring Homomorphisms

## 15.1	Definition and Examples

**Definition**	Ring Homomorphism and Isomorphism

> A ring homomorphism $\phi$ from a ring $R$ to a ring $S$ is a mapping from $R$ to $S$ that preserves the two ring operations; that is, for all $a$, $b$ in $R$,
> $$
> \phi(a+b) = \phi(a) + \phi(b)
> \\
> \phi(ab) = \phi(a) \phi(b).
> $$
> A ring homomorphism that is both one-to-one and onto is called a ring isomorphism.

- The ==natural homomorphism== from $\Z$ to $\Z_n$: $ \phi: k \mapsto k \mod{n} $.

- To determine homomorphisms from $\Z_m$ to $\Z_n$, let $\phi(1) = a$ and notice that $ a \cdot a = \phi(1 \cdot 1) = a $.

- Let $R$ be a commutative ring of characteristic $2$. Then the mapping $a \ra a^2$ is a ring homomorphism from $R$ to $R$.

- **Theorem of Gersonides**: The only case of positive integers when $ 2^m = 3^n + 1 $ is for $ (m, n) = (3, 2) $.

  In fact, it's the only solution in the natural numbers of $ x^m - y^n = 1 $ where $ m, n, x, y > 1 $.

## 15.2	Properties of Ring Homomorphisms

**Theorem 15.1**	Properties of Ring homomorphisms

> Let $\phi$ be a ring homomorphism from a ring $R$ to a ring $S$. Let $A$ be a subring of $R$ and let $B$ be an ideal of $S$.
>
> 1. $ \forall r \in R, n \in \N^+,\, \phi(nr) = n\phi(r),\, \phi(r^n) = \phi(r)^n $.
> 2. $ \phi(A) = \Bqty{ \phi(a) \mid a \in A } $ is a subring of $S$.
> 3. If $A$ is an ideal and $\phi$ is onto, then $\phi(A)$ is an ideal.
> 4. $ \phi\inv(B) = \Bqty{ r \in R \mid \phi(r) \in B } $ is an ideal of $R$.
> 5. If $R$ is commutative, then $\phi(R)$ is commutative.
> 6. If $R$ has a unity $1$, $S \ne \Bqty{0}$, and $\phi$ is onto, then $\phi(1)$ is the unity of $S$ and units in $R$ map to units in $S$.
> 7. $\phi$ is an isomorphism if and only if $\phi$ is onto and $ \Ker\phi = \Bqty{ r \in R \mid \phi(r) = 0 } = \Bqty{0} $.
> 8. If $\phi$ is an isomorphism from $R$ to $S$, then $\phi\inv$ is an isomorphism from $S$ onto $R$.

- The ==pullback== of an ideal is an ideal, the converse is not true.
- Suppose that $R$ and $S$ are commutative rings with unities. Let $\phi$ be a ring homomorphism from $R$ onto $S$ and let $B$ be an ideal of $S$.
  - If $B$ is ==prime== in $S$, then $\phi\inv(B)$ is prime in $R$.
  - If $B$ is ==maximal== in $S$, then $\phi\inv(B)$ is maximal in $R$.
- The homomorphic image of a ==principal ideal ring== is a principal ideal ring.

**Theorem 15.2**	Kernels are Ideals

> Let $\phi$ be a ring homomorphism from a ring $R$ to a ring $S$. Then $ \Ker\phi = \Bqty{ r \in R \mid \phi(r) = 0 } $ is an ideal of $R$.

**Theorem 15.3**	First Isomorphism Theorem for Rings

> Let $\phi$ be a ring homomorphism from $R$ to $S$. Then the mapping $ \psi: R/\Ker\phi \ra \phi(R),\, r+\Ker\phi \mapsto \phi(r) $ is an isomorphism. In symbols, $ R/\Ker\phi \approx \phi(R) $.

**Proof**	Fundamental Theorem of Ring Homorphism
$$
\begin{align}
\psi((x+\Ker\phi)+(y+\Ker\phi))
&= \psi(x+y+\Ker\phi)
\\
&= \phi(x+y)
= \phi(x) + \phi(y)
\\
&= \psi(x+\Ker\phi) +\psi(y+\Ker\phi)
\\
\psi((x+\Ker\phi)(y+\Ker\phi))
&= \psi(xy+\Ker\phi)
\\
&= \phi(xy)
= \phi(x) \phi(y)
\\
&= \psi(x+\Ker\phi) \psi(y+\Ker\phi)
%\qed
\end{align}
$$
**Corollary 1**	Second Isomorphism Theorem for Rings

> If $A$ is a subring of $R$ and $B$ is an ideal of $R$, then $ A/(A\cap B) \approx AB/B $.

**Proof**	Let $ \phi: A \ra AB/B,\, a \mapsto aB $, then $ \Ker\phi = A \cap B $.

**Corollary 2**	Third Isomorphism Theorem for Rings

> If $A$ and $B$ are ideals of $R$ and $ B \subseteq A $, then $ (S/B)/(A/B) \approx S/A $.

**Proof**	Let $ \phi: S/B \ra S/A,\, sB \mapsto sA $, then $ \Ker\phi = A/B $.

**Theorem 15.4**	Ideals are Kernels

> Every ideal of a ring $R$ is the kernel of a ring homomorphism of $R$. In particular, an ideal $A$ is the kernel of the **natural mapping** $ \phi: R \ra R/A,\, r\mapsto r+A $.

- $ \Z[x] / \aqty{x} \approx \Z $, and because $\Z$ is an integral domain but not a field, the ideal $\aqty{x}$ is prime but nor maximal in $\Z[x]$.

**Theorem 15.5**	Homomorphism from $\Z$ to a Ring with Unity

> Let $R$ be a ring with unity  $1$. The mapping $ \phi: \Z \ra R,\, n \mapsto n \cdot 1 $ is a ring homomorphism.

**Corollary 1**	A Ring with Unity Contains $\Z_n$ or $\Z$

> If $R$ is a ring with unity and the characteristic of $R$ is $n>0$, then $R$ contains a subring isomorphic to $\Z_n$. If the characteristic of $R$ is $0$, then $R$ contains a subring isomorphic to $\Z$.

**Corollary 2**	$\Z_m$ Is a Homomorphic Image of $\Z$

> For any positive integer $m$, the mapping of $ \phi: \Z \ra \Z_m,\, x \mapsto x \mod{m} $ is a ring homomorphism.

**Corollary 3**	A Field Conatins $\Z_p$ or $\Q$

> If $\F$ is a field of characteristic $p$, then $\F$ contains a subfield isomorphic to $\Z_p$. If $\F$ is a field of characteristic $0$, then $\F$ contains a subfield isomorphic to $\Q$.

Since the intersection of all subfields of a field is itself a subfield, and every field has a smallest subfield, which is called the **prime subfield** of the field. The prime subfield is isomorphic to $\Z_p$ or $\Q$.

## 15.3	The Field of Quotients

**Theorem 15.6**	Field of Quotients

> Let $\D$ be an integral domain. Then there exists a field $\F$ (called the **field of quotients** of $\D$) that contains a subring isomorphic to $\D$.

**Proof**	Let $ S = \Bqty{ (a, b) \mid a, b \in \D, b \ne 0 } $, we define an equivalence relation on $S$ by $ (a, b) \equiv (c, d) $ if $ ad = bc $, denote the equivalence class that contains $(x, y)$ by $x/y$, and define addition and multiplication on $\F$ by
$$
a/b + c/d = (ad+bc) / (bd) \text{ and } a/b \cdot c/d = (ac) / (bd).
$$
Then the mapping $ \phi: \D \ra \F,\, x \mapsto x/1 $ is a ring isomorphism.	$\qed$

- When $\F$ is a field , the field of quotients of $\F[x]$ is traditionally denoted by $\F(x)$.
- Let $p$ be a prime, then $ \Z_p(x) = \Bqty{ f(x)/g(x) \mid f(x), g(x) \in \Z_p[x], g(x) \ne 0 } $ is an infinite field of characteristic $p$.
- The field of quotients of a field $\F$ is ring-isomorphic to $\F$.
- The field of quotients of an integral domain $\D$ is the smallest field containing $\D$.

## 15.4	Exercises

1. Examples

   1. Let $ S = \Bqty{ \left. \begin{bmatrix} a & b \\ bd & a \end{bmatrix} \;\right|\; a, b \in \R },\, d \in \Z $, then

      $ \phi: \Z[\sqrt{d}\,] \to S,\, a + b\sqrt{d} \mapsto \begin{bmatrix} a & b \\ bd & a \end{bmatrix} $ is a ring isomorphism.

   2. $ \phi: \Z_m \to \Z_n,\, x \mapsto x \mod{n} $ is a ring homomorphism if and only if $ n \mid m $.

   3. $ \phi: \Z_{mn} \to \Z_p \oplus \Z_n,\, x \mapsto (x \mod{m},\, x\mod{n}) $ where $ \gcd(m,n)=1 $.

   4. $ \phi: \Z_m \to \Z_n,\, x \mapsto ax $ where $ n \mid m $ and $a$ is an idempotent of $\Z_n$.

   5. $ \phi: \Z[\i]/\aqty{a+b\i} \to \Z[\i]/\aqty{a-b\i},\, z + \aqty{a+b\i} \mapsto z + \aqty{a-b\i} $ where $a$ and $b$ are nonzero real numbers.

   6. Let $ R = \Bqty{ \left. \begin{bmatrix} a&b\\b&a \end{bmatrix} \;\right|\; a, b \in \Z } $, then

      $ \phi: R \to \Z,\, \begin{bmatrix} a&b\\b&a \end{bmatrix} \mapsto a-b $ is a ring homomorphism.

2. Both $ \phi: \Z \oplus \Z \to \Z,\, (a, b) \mapsto a $ and $ \psi: \Z_6 \to \Z_6,\, x \mapsto 3x $ take a zero-divisor to the unity.

3. If $ \phi: R \to S $ is onto and $\char{R}\ne0$, then $ \char{S} \mid \char{R} $.

4. Let $R$ be a commutative ring of prime characteristic $p$, then the **Frobenius map** $ x \mapsto x^p $ is a ring homomorphism from $R$ to $R$. If $R$ is a field, then the mapping is an isomorphism.



# 16	Polynomial Rings

## 16.1	Notation and Terminology

**Definition**	Ring of Polynomials over $R$

> Let $R$ be a commutative ring. The set of formal symbols
> $$
> R[x] = \Bqty{ a_nx^n + a_{n-1}x^{n-1} + \cdots + a_1x + a_0 \mid a_i \in R, n \in \N },
> $$
> is called the ring of polynomials over $R$ in the **indeterminate** $x$. Two elements $ a_nx^n + a_{n-1}x^{n-1} + \cdots + a_1x + a_0 $ and $ b_mx^m + b_{m-1}x^{m-1} + \cdots + b_1x + b_0 $ of $R[x]$ are considered equal if and only if $a_i=b_i$ for all nonnegative integers $i$. (Define $a_i=0$ when $i>n$ and $b_m=0$ when $i>m$.)

**Definition**	Addition and Multiplication in $R[x]$

- For $ f(x) = a_nx^n + a_{n-1}x^{n-1} + \cdots + a_1x + a_0,\, a_n \ne 0 $, the **degree** is $n$, denoted by $ \deg{f(x)} $, and the **leading coefficient** is $a_n$. If $a_n$ is the unity, then $f(x)$ is a **monic** polynomial.
- In an integral domain, $ \deg(f(x)g(x)) = \deg(f(x)) + \deg(g(x)) $, but it is possible that $ \deg(f(x)g(x)) < \deg(f(x)) + \deg(g(x)) $.

**Theorem 16.1**	$\D$ an Integral Domain Implies $\D[x]$ an Integral Domain

> If $\D$ is an integral domain, then $\D[x]$ is an integral domain.

- Since $\D[x]$ is a ring, we only need to prove that $\D[x]$ is commutative with a unity and has no zero-divisors.

## 16.2	The Division Algorithm and Consequences

**Theorem 16.2**	Division Algorithm for $F[x]$

> Let $F$ be a field and let $f(x), g(x) \in \F[x]$ with $g(x) \ne 0$. Then there exist unique polynomials $q(x)$ and $r(x)$ in $\F[x]$ such that $ f(x) = g(x)q(x) + r(x) $ where either $r(x) = 0$ or $ \deg{r(x)} < \deg{g(x)} $.

- Long division process, which is also true for integral domains.

- If $ f(x) = g(x) h(x) $, we write $ g(x) \mid f(x) $ and call $g(x)$ a **factor** of $f(x)$.
- An element $a$ is a **zero** (or a **root**) of $f(x)$ if $f(a) = 0$, and we say that $a$ is a **zero of multiplicity $k$** if $ (x-a)^k \mid f(x) $ but $ (x-a)^{k+1} \nmid f(x) $.

**Corollary 1**	Remainder Theorem

> Let $\F$ be a field, $a \in \F$, and $ f(x) \in \F[x] $. Then $f(a)$ is the remainder in the division of $f(x)$ by $x-a$.

**Corollary 2**	Factor Theorem

> Let $\F$ be a field, $a \in \F$, and $f(x) \in \F[x]$. Then $a$ is a zero of $f(x)$ if and only if $x-a$ is a factor of $f(x)$.

- It's also true over any commutative ring with unity.

**Theorem 16.3**	Polynomials of Degree $n$ Have at Most $n$ Zeros

> A polynomial of degree $n$ over a ==field== has at most $n$ zeros, counting multiplicity.

- It's also true over integral domains.

- In the ring $\Z_8[x]$, $x^2+7$ has $1, 3, 5, 7$ as zeros. ($\Z_p[x]$ is a field.)

- A **primitive $n$^th^ root of unity**: $ \omega = \e^{\i\pi/n} $.

**Definition**	Principal Ideal Domain (PID)

> A **principal ideal domain** is an ==integral domain== $R$ in which every ideal has the form $ \aqty{a} = \Bqty{ ra \mid r \in R } $ for some $a$ in $R$.

**Theorem 16.4**	$F[x]$ Is a PID

> Let $\F$ be a field, then $\F[x]$ is a principal ideal domain.

- If a field $\F$ has an ideal $I$, then $ I = \Bqty{0} $ or $\F$.

  **Proof**	If $ \exist a \in I, a\ne0 $, then $ a \cdot a\inv = 1 \in I $, so $ \forall x \in \F,\, x = x \cdot 1 \in I $.

- $\Z[x]$ is an iconic integral domain of polynomials, but it's not PID, because the ideal of all elements in $\Z[x]$ with even constant term is not generated by a single element.

**Theorem 16.5**	Criterion for $ I = \aqty{g(x)} $

> Let $\F$ be a field, $I$ a nonzero ideal in $\F[x]$, and $g(x)$ an element of $\F[x]$. Then $ I = \aqty{g(x)} $ if and only if $g(x)$ is a nonzero polynomial of minimum degree in $I$.

- $ \phi: \R[x] \ra \C,\, f(x) \mapsto f(\i) $, then $ x^2+1 \in \Ker\phi $ and is of minimum degree. Thus, $ \Ker\phi = \aqty{x^2+1} $ and $ \R[x] / \aqty{x^2+1} \approx \C $.

## 16.3	Exercises

**Wilson's Theorem**

> For every integer $n>1$, $ (n-1)! \mod{n} = -1 $ if and only if $n$ is prime.

- $ (p-2)! \mod{p} = 1 $.

---

1. Every element in the ring of polynomial functions from $\Z_p$ to $\Z_p$ can be written in the form $ a_{p-1}x^{p-1} + \cdots + a_0 $.

2. $ R \approx S \RLA R[x] \approx S[x] $. :star:

   1. If $\phi:R\to S$ is a ring homomorphism, then $ \bar\phi : R[x] \to S[x],\, (a_nx^n + \cdots + a_0) \to \phi(a_n)x^n + \cdots + \phi(a_0) $ is also a ring homomorphism.
   2. $ \phi: R[x] \to R,\, f(x) \mapsto f(r) $ is called the **evaluation homomorphism**.

3. $U(p)$ is cyclic.

   Proof: For $p>3$, otherwise $U(p)$ has a subgroup isomorphic to $\Z_q \oplus \Z_q$ where $q$ is a prime. But then $x^q-1$ in $\Z_q[x]$ has $q^2-1$ zeros.

4. In $ \Z_p[x] $, $ x^{p-1} - 1 = (x-1)(x-2)\cdots(x-(p-1)) $.

5. Relation between a ring and a polynomial ring :star:

   1. $I$ is an ideal of a ring $ R \QRLA I[x] $ is an ideal of $R[x]$.

   2. $I$ is a maximal ideal of a ring $ R \quad\nRightarrow\quad I[x] $ is a maximal ideal of $R[x]$.

   3. $I$ is a prime ideal of a ring $ R \QRA I[x] $ is a prime ideal of $R[x]$.

6. If there is a ring homomorphism from $\Z$ onto $\F$, then $ \F \approx \Z_p $.

7. Suppose $f(x)$ is a polynomial with ==odd coefficients== and ==even degree==, then $f(x)$ has no rational zeros. :crescent_moon:

   Hint: Analog of the proof that $\sqrt{2}$ is irrational.



Confusion: 8



# 17	Factorization of Polynomials

## 17.1	Reducibility Tests

**Definition**	Irreducible Polynomial

> Let $\D$ be an integral domain. A polynomial $f(x)$ from $\D[x]$ that is neither the zero polynomial nor a unit in $\D[x]$is said to be **irreducible** over $\D$ if, whenever $f(x)$ is expressed as a product $f(x) = g(x)h(x)$ with $g(x)$ and $h(x)$ from $\D[x]$, then $g(x)$ or $h(x)$ is a unit in $\D[x]$. A nonzero, nonunit element of $\D[x]$ that is not irreducible over $D$ is called reducible over $D$.

 **Theorem 17.1**	Reducibility Test for Degrees $2$ and $3$

> Let $\F$ be a field. If $f(x) \in \F[x]$ and $\deg{f(x)} = 2$ or $3$, then $f(x)$ is reducible over $\F$ if and only if $f(x)$ has a zero in $\F$.

-  In $\Q[x]$, $ x^4+x^2+1 = (x^2+x+1)(x^2-x+1)$, $ x^4+2x^2+1 = (x^2+1)^2 $, and in $\R[x]$, $ x^4+1 = (x^2+\sqrt{2}x+1)(x^2-\sqrt{2}x+1) $.

**Definition**	Content of a Polynomial, Primitive Polynomial

> The **content** of a nonzero polynomial $ a_nx^n + a_{n-1}x^{n-1} + \cdots + a_0 $ where the $a$'s are integers, is the greatest common divisor of $ a_n, a_{n-1}, \cdots, a_0 $. A **primitive polynomial** is an element of $\Z[x]$ with content $1$.

**Gauss's Lemma**

> The product of two primitive polynomials is primitive.

**Theorem 17.2**	Reducibility over $\Q$ Implies Reducibility over $\Z$

> Let $f(x) \in \Z[x]$, if $f(x)$ is reducible over $\Q$, then it is reducible over $\Z$.

- If $f(x)$ is irreducible over $\Z$, then it's irreducible over $\Q$.
- $ f(x) = 2(x^2+1) $ is irreducible over $\Q$ but reducible over $\Z$ since $2$ is not a unit of $\Z$.

## 17.2	Irreducibility Tests

**Theorem 17.3**	Mod $p$ Irreducibility Test

> Let $p$ be a prime and suppose that $f(x) \in \Z[x]$ with $ \deg{f(x)} \ge 1 $. Let $ \bar{f}(x) $ be the polynomial in $\Z_p[x]$ obtained from $f(x)$ by reducing all the coefficients of $f(x)$ modulo $p$. If $ \bar{f}(x) $ is irreducible over $\Z_p$ and $ \deg{\bar{f}(x)} = \deg{f(x)} $, then $f(x)$ is irreducible over $\Q$.

- To prove it: if $f(x)$ is reducible over $\Q$, then it's reducible over $\Z_p$.

**Theorem 17.4**	Eisenstein's Criterion

> Let $ f(x) = a_nx^n + a_{n-1}x^{n-1} + \cdots +a_0 \in \Z[x] $. If there is a prime $p$ such that $ p \nmid a_n, p \mid a_{n-1}, \cdots , p \mid a_0 $ and $ p^2 \nmid a_0 $, then $f(x)$ is irreducible over $\Q$.

**Corollary**	Irreducibility of $p$^th^ Cyclotomic Polynomial

> For any prime $p$, the $p$^th^ **cyclotomic polynomial**
> $$
> \varPhi_p(x) = \frac{x^p-1}{x-1} = x^{p-1} + x^{p-2} + \cdots + x + 1
> $$
> is irreducible over $\Q$.

**Proof**	$ \displaystyle \varPhi_p(x+1) = x^{p-1} + \binom{p}{1}x^{p-2} + \binom{p}{2}x^{p-3} + \cdots + \binom{p}{p-1} $ is irreducible over $\Q$.

---

**Theorem 17.5**	$\aqty{p(x)}$ Is Maximal If and Only If $p(x)$ Is Irreducible

> Let $\F$ be a field and let $p(x) \in \F[x]$. Then $\aqty{p(x)}$ is a ==maximal== ideal in $\F[x]$ if and only if $p(x)$ is ==irreducible== over $\F$.

**Corollary 1**	$\F[x]/\aqty{p(x)}$ Is a Field

> Let $\F$ be a field and $p(x)$ be an irrducible polynomial over $\F$, then $ \F[x] / \aqty{p(x)} $ is a field.

- This follows directly from Theorem 14.4 and 17.5.

**Corollary 2**	$p(x) \mid a(x)b(x)$ Implies $p(x) \mid a(x)$ or $p(x) \mid b(x)$

> Let $\F$ be a field and let $ p(x), a(x), b(x) \in \F[x] $. If $p(x)$ is irreducible over $\F$ and $p(x) \mid a(x)b(x)$, then $p(x) \mid a(x)$ or $p(x) \mid b(x)$.

- To construct a field with $p^n$ elements, find a polynomial of degree $n$ with no zero in $\Z_p$, say $P_n(x)$, then $\Z_p[x]/P_n(x)$ satisfies.

## 17.3	Unique Factorization in $\Z[x]$

- The only units in $\Z[x]$ are $ \pm 1 $.
- The irreducible polynomials of degree $0$ over $\Z$ are $ f(x) = \pm p $ where $p$ is a prime.
- Every nonconstant irreducible polynomial from $\Z[x]$ is primitive.

**Theorem 17.6**	Unique Factorization in $\Z[x]$

> Every polynomial in $\Z[x]$ that is not the zero polynomial or a unit in $\Z[x]$ can be written in the form
> $$
> b_1 b_2 \cdots b_s p_1(x) p_2(x) \cdots p_m(x),
> $$
> *uniquely* where the $b_i$'s are irreducible polynomials of degree $0$ and the $p_i(x)$'s are irreducible polynomials of positive degree.

## 17.4	Weird Dice: An Application of Unique Factorization

1, 2, 2, 3, 3, 4

1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8

## 17.5	Exercises

**Rational Root Theorem**

> Let $ f(x) = a_nx^n + a_{n-1}x^{n-1} + \cdots + a_0 \in \Z[x]\; (a_n \ne 0) $, if $ f(r/s) = 0 $ where $r$ and $s$ are relatively prime integers, then $ r \mid a_0,\, s \mid a_n $.

**Proof**	i.e. $ a_nr^m + a_{n-1}sr^{n-1} + \cdots + a_0s^n = 0 $. This shows that $ s \mid a_nr^n $ and $ r \mid s^na_0 $. $ \qed $

---

1. In $ \Z_p[x] $, $ ax^2 + bx + c = 0 \RLA (2ax+b)^2 = b^2-4ac $, if $ \sqrt{b^2-4ac} $ has at least one solution, then the quadratic formula $ x = (-b\pm\sqrt{b^2-4ac}) \cdot (2a)\inv $ holds.
2. The number of reducible polynomials of degree $n$ over $\Z_p$ is $ p\pqty{\mathrm{C}_p^n + p} $.



Better Solution: 8, 14.e, 

## 17.6	Bibliography of Serge Lang



# 18	Divisibility in Integral Domains

## 18.1	Irreducibles, Primes

**Definition**	Associates, Irreducibles, Primes

> Elements $a$ and $b$ of an ==integral domain== $D$ are called **associates** if $a=ub$, where $u$ is a unit of $D$.
>
> A nonzero element $a$ of an integral domain $D$ is called an **irreducible** if $a$ is not a unit and whenever $ a = bc,\, b,c \in D $, then $b$ or $c$ is a unit.
>
> A nonzero element $a$ of an integral domain $D$ is called a **prime** if $a$ is not a unit and $ a \mid bc $ implies $ a \mid b $ or $ a \mid c $.

- **associates** 

  - equivalence relation: $ a \sim b $ if $a=ub$.
  - $ a = ub \QRLA \aqty{a} = \aqty{b} $.

- **irreducible** 

  - The ==product== of an irreducible and a unit is an ==irreducible==.

- **prime** 

  - $a$ if a ==prime== if and only if $\aqty{a}$ is a prime ideal.

- **norm** 

  $ \Z[\sqrt{d}>] = \Bqty{ a + b\sqrt{d} \mid a, b \in \Z } $, where $d\ne1$ and not divisible by the square of a prime. Define a function called the **norm**: $ N: \Z[\sqrt{d}>] \to \N,\, a+b\sqrt{d} \mapsto \vqty{a^2-db^2} $, then

  1. $ N(x) = 0 $ if and only if $x=0$.

  2. $ N(xy) = N(x)N(y) $.

  3. $x$ is a unit if and only if $N(x)=1$.

  4. If $N(x)$ is prime, then $x$ is irreducible.

     <span style="color:#999999">The converse is not true.</span>

  - If $d<-1$, then the only units of $\Z[\sqrt{d}>]$ is $ \pm 1 $.

**e.g.** 

- In $\Z[\sqrt{-3}>]$, $1+\sqrt{-3}$ is an irreducible, but not a prime. (Consider $ (1+\sqrt{-3})(1-\sqrt{-3}) = 4 $, but $ 1 + \sqrt{-3} \nmid 2 $.)
- To show that $ a_0+b_0\sqrt{d} $ is irreducible, notice that every solution of $ a^2-db^2 = c $ would also hold in $\Z_n$, just try to find a counter-example.

**Theorem 18.1**	Prime Implies Irreducible

> In an integral domain, every prime is an irreducible.

**Proof**	If $a=bc$, then $a\mid b$ or $a \mid c$. Let $ b = at = bct $, then $1=ct$, thus $c$ is a unit. $\qed$

---

**Theorem 18.2**	PID Implies Irreducible Equals Prime

> In a principal ideal domain, en element is an irreducible if and only if it is prime.

**Proof**	Suppose $ a \mid bc $, consider the ideal $ I = \Bqty{ ax+by \mid x,y \in D } = \aqty{d} $. Let $ a = dr $, then $d$ is a unit or $r$ is a unit.

1. If $d$ is a unit, then $I=D$ and $ 1 = ax + by \RA c = acx + bcy $, and since $ a \mid bc $, we have $ a \mid c $.
2. If $r$ is a unit, then $ I = \aqty{d} = \aqty{a} $, and we have $at=b$, thus $ a \mid b $. $\qed$

---

- This theorem holds in a UFD.
- $\Z[x]$ is not a principal ideal domain since we have the ideal $ I = \aqty{2, x} $.

## 18.2	Historical Discussion of Fermat's Last Theorem

## 18.3	Unique Factorization Domains

**Definition**	Unique Factorization Domain (UFD)

> An integral domain $D$ is a **unique factorization domain** if
>
> 1. every nonzero element of $D$ that is ==not a unit== can be written as a product of ==irreducibles== of $D$; and
> 2. the factorization into irreducibles is unique up to ==*associates*== and the ==order== in which the factors appear.

- $\C$ is not a UFD since $ 5 = (2+\i)(2-\i) = (1+2\i)(1-2\i) $.

**Lemma**	*Ascending Chain Condition* for a PID

> In a principal ideal domain, any strictly increasing chian of ideals $ I_1 \subset I_2 \subset \cdots $ must be finite in length.

**Proof**	Let $ I = I_1 \cup I_2 \cup \cdots = \aqty{a} $, say $ a \in I_n $, then $ I_i \subseteq I = \aqty{a} \subseteq I_n $, so that $I_n$ is the last member of the chain. $\qed$

---

**Theorem 18.3**	PID Implies UFD

> Every principal ideal domain is a unique factorization domain.

- An integral domain with the property that there is no infinite, strictly increasing chain of ideals in $D$, is called a **Noetherian domain**.
- $\Z[x]$ is a Noetherian domain and also a UFD, but not a PID.

**Corollary**	$\F[x]$ Is a UFD

> Let $\F$ be a field, then $\F[x]$ is a unique factorization domain.

<span style="color:#999999">We can prove the Eisentein's Criterion by this corollary elegantly.</span>

## 18.4	Euclidean Domains

**Definition**	Euclidean Domain (ED)

> An integral domain $D$ is called a **Euclidean domain** if there is a function $d$ (called the **measure**) from the nonzero elements of $D$ to the nonnegative integers such that
>
> 1. $ d(a) \le d(ab) $ for all nonzero $a, b$ in $D$; and
> 2. if $ a, b \in D,\, b \ne 0 $, then there exist elements $q$ and $r$ in $D$ such that $ a = bq + r $, where $ r = 0 $ or $ d(r) < d(b) $.

- $u$ is a unit $ \QRLA d(u) = d(1) $. $%See Exercise 8.$
- $ a=ub \QRA d(a) = d(b) $.
- The subdomain of an ED may not be an ED. $%See Exercise 38.$
- Similarities Between $\Z$ and $\F[x]$.

| Properties                  | $\Z$                                          | $\F[x]$                                              |
| --------------------------- | --------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------- |
| Euclidean Domain            | $ d(a) = \vqty{a} $.                          | $ d(f(x)) = \deg{f(x)} $.                            |
| Units                       | If and ony if $\vqty{a}=1$.                   | If and only if $ \deg{f(x)} = 0 $.                   |
| Division Algorithm          | $ a = bq + r $.                               | $ f(x) = g(x)q(x) + r(x) $.                          |
| Principal Ideal Domain      | $ I = \aqty{a} $ where $\aqty{a}$ is minimum. | $ I = \aqty{f(x)} $ where $ \deg{f(x)} $ is minimum. |
| Prime                       | No nontrivial factors.                        | No nontrivial factors.                               |
| Unique Factorization Domain | Every element is a unique product of primes.  | Every element is a unique product of irreducibles.   |

- $ \Z[i] = \Bqty{ a+b\i \mid a, b \in \Z } $ is a Euclidean domain with $ d(a+b\i) = a^2+b^2 $.

  1. $ d(x) \le d(xy) $ follows directly from $ d(xy) = d(x)d(y) $.

  2. Say $ xy\inv = s + t\i,\, s, t \in \Q $, let $m$ be the integer nearest $s$, and $n$ be the integer nearest $t$, then

     $ xy\inv = (m+n\i) + [(s-m)+(t-n)\i] $,

     $ x = (m+n\i)y + r,\, r = [(s-m)+(t-n)\i]y $,

     $ d(r) \le \pqty{\tfrac{1}{4} + \tfrac{1}{4}}d(y) < d(y) $.

  - $\Z[\i]/I$ is finite.

- $\Z[\sqrt{d}]$ is Euclidean domain when $ d = \pm 2, \pm 1 $, and there are no other negative values that satisfy.

**Theorem 18.4**	ED Implies PID

> Every Euclidean domain is a principal ideal domain.

**Proof**	The zero ideal is $\aqty{a}$. For a nonzero ideal $I$, let $ a \in I $ be such that $d(a)$ is a minimum, then $ I = \aqty{a} $. For, $ \forall b \in I,\, b = aq + r$, but $ r = b - aq \in I $, so $ d(r) \ge d(a) $, thus $r=0$ and $ b \in \aqty{a} $. $\qed$

---

- There are PID that are not ED.

**Corollary**	ED Implies UFD

> Every Euclidean domain is a unique factorization domain.

$ \begin{align} \quad ED &\RA PID \RA UFD, \\ UFD &\nRightarrow PID \nRightarrow ED. \end{align} $

**Theorem 18.5**	$D$ a UFD Implies $D[x]$ a UFD

> If $D$ is a unique factorization domain, then $D[x]$ is a unique factorization domain.

- $\Z$ is a PID, but $\Z[x]$ is not a PID.

- $ \Z[\sqrt{-5}] $ is an integral domain but not a UFD,

  since $ 46 = 2 \cdot 23 = (1+3\sqrt{-5})(1-3\sqrt{-5}) $.

## 18.5	Exercises

1. Suppose $a$ and $b$ belong to an integral domain and $b \ne 0$, then

   $ \aqty{ab} $ is a proper subset of $ \aqty{b} \QRLA a $  is not a unit.

2. Every proper ideal of a PID is contained in its maximal ideal.

3. In $\Z_n$ where $n$ need not to be a prime,

   1. $ p \mid n \QRLA p $ is ==prime== in $\Z_n$.
   2. $ p^2 \mid n \QRLA p $ is ==irreducible== in $\Z_n$ and $ p \mid n$.

4. *Descentding chain condition*

   An ==integral domain== with the property that every strictly decreasing chain of ideals $ I_1 \supset I_2 \supset \cdots $ must be finite in length is a ==field==.

5. An ideal $A$ of a commutative ring $R$ with unity is said to be **finitely generated** if there exist elemts $ \soneto{a}{n} $ of $A$ such that $ A = \aqty{\soneto{a}{n}} $.

   An integral domain $R$ satisfies the ascending chain condition. $\QRLA$ Every  ideal of $R$ is finitely generated.

6. For every field $\F$, there are infinitely many irreducibles in $\F[x]$.

7. Let $I$ be a non-zero ideal in a PID $R$, then $R/I$ has a fiinte number of ideals.




Question:

- 30, $\RA$.

## 18.6	Bibliography of Sophie Germain

## 18.7	Bibliography of Andrew Wiles

## 18.8	Bibliography of Pierre de Fermat

